So we have API requests in a bunch
of our various different components.
You have two choices here,
and I'm gonna say you actually really only have one choice,
but in theory, you could spin up your API
and you could have it make real requests to a fake API
or something like that.
Don't do that, it usually ends in heartache.
So in that case, you probably wanna like mock it,
like make mock requests so that it goes to make a request
and then it just gets faked and answered back to it.
That's what I'm gonna teach you how to do now.
So we're gonna install vitest-fetch-mock at 0.3.0.
We didn't have to use vitest-fetch-mock,
it's actually really easy to do directly with vitest.
It just adds some niceties
and I just didn't wanna make you code all that stuff,
so we're just gonna stick with it.
Let's write the code for testing.
We're gonna test the contact page.
So let's go create another test file in here,
and this one gets to be called something
that's kinda silly, it's contact.lazy.test.jsx.
And if you're looking at it as like,
that is the dumbest name of a file I've ever created,
just wait, we're about to do one that's even sillier.
But why?
Well, lazy, it's being dependent on that
for 10-stack router,
and test, it's being dependent on that
for the testing suite,
so this is why I kinda get like a little hesitant
about should file names be significant?
Because then you end up with silly stuff like this,
which obviously this is silly.
But here we are, we're gonna use it anyway.
So import render from at testing library slash react,
import expect test, and another one here called vi
that we're gonna talk about, I promise you,
it is not vim, it is different than that.
And in any case, I will show you
how to get out of it afterwards.
Import create fetch mock from vitest fetch mock,
import query client provider,
and query client from 10-stack router,
sorry, 10-stack query, rather, query client,
and import route from vitest provider,
routes, contact.lazy.
So why are we importing stuff from react query?
That seems kinda strange, right?
Well, it's because in order for react query to function,
it depends on a query client being there,
and we're not rendering it in the context of app, right?
An app is what actually possesses the query client,
so we have to create a fake one for it.
It's not a fake one, it's actually a real one,
but we have to create one for it.
So that's exactly what we're gonna do here.
We're gonna say const query client
equals new query client.
Okay?
Let's talk about vi for a second.
Vi is the name of the spy library inside of vitest,
so if you've ever used cnon in old react testing,
it's still current, you can still use cnon in lots of stuff.
It's the same idea,
but it's basically like a thing that's like,
all right, I'm gonna create a fake version of this,
and then I'm gonna ask later,
did this get called,
what functions did this get called with?
That's called spying in testing,
and that's what vi does for you.
So we're gonna say const fetchMocker
equals createFetchMock vi,
and this is gonna kind of fetchMocker.enableMocks.
What this does is it goes and monkey patches fetch
to be now testable, right?
It's not actually gonna go call really the API.
It's just going to fake like it did, right?
And now what's cool about that is we can say,
hey fetch, what were you called with?
And that's a good thing for us
because now we can go back and say,
did you call the right API?
Did you do the right things
given that these kinds of inputs, right?
That's the point.
All right, so we're gonna say test can submit contact form.
Seems like a pretty good test, right?
Async function.
And this one's gonna have a little bit more,
but we're gonna do actually like simulated test events,
which is gonna be cool.
All right, so first thing we're gonna say,
fetchMocker mockResponse once, not just mockResponse.
I don't think it matters
because we're only gonna call it once.
In any case, basically you're saying to the fetchMocker
is like, hey, if you get called,
respond with this from the API.
Because we know like only one API
is gonna be called in the course of this.
We don't have to really think too much
about like which one was called and why
and that kind of stuff.
But I can imagine like,
let's say you have something
that like has like nine different API calls.
You have to get a bit more specific,
like all right, to this route, respond with this.
To this route, respond with this.
We don't have to care too much about that
so we're not going to.
All right, and then this is gonna be just status okay,
because that's what the API responds with now.
All right, we're gonna say const screen equals render.
And remember, we have to give it a queryClient provider.
And a queryClient equals, as you might guess, queryClient.
And we're gonna say route.options.component.
So why this kind of strangeness?
Well, if you remember from contact here,
what gets exported is actually this lazy file route
which has a bunch of machinery around it
that the TanStack router uses.
We don't need that, we just need the component.
So that's why we're doing the route.options.component.
That's where that comes from.
All right, now let's simulate all of our input events.
So we're gonna say const name input equals screen.
And when you can do getByPlaceHolder,
that seems like actually a pretty appropriate one.
Because that's something that the user
would experience, right?
And we'll do three of those, and we'll do email input.
Email and message text area.
And it is message.
All right, so now we have handles
on all of our various different inputs.
And we're going to put some test data together.
const testData equals whatever you want in here.
I'll just put Brian, email,
Dustin's hate mail at example.com.
And message, just let Brian teach Dustin.
So we're gonna say name input.value
is assigned testData.name.
And again, we're gonna do that three times.
The email input is gonna be email,
and the message text area is going to be message.
Again, this would just be like a user
filling out a form, right?
All right, after they fill out a form,
what do they do next?
Click the button.
const btn equals screen.getByRoll.
Button's a pretty good roll.
There's only one button on the page as we know.
What are you gonna do to the button?
Click.
Kind of a cool feature, right?
Now, this one's kind of cool.
I like this.
Let's just go do it on our page and see what happens.
Okay, how do we know that our page was submitted correctly?
What did we do wrong here?
Your server's not running.
Is it not?
Oh, it's not.
It's not.
It's not running.
Is it not?
Oh, it's not.
You're right.
I'm not gonna get it running right now,
but what would eventually happen
is the submitted shows up, right?
That's what you would expect to show up here.
But it's not instant, right?
It goes to the loading state,
and then eventually it settles in an H3 of saying submitted.
But we know that the entire process went through
once that H3 shows up.
So what you can say is you can say const H3 equals await
screen find by role.
We're looking for a heading of level three,
which is another way of saying level three or H3, right?
This await means like,
hey, this isn't gonna show up right away,
but wait for this.
Wait for it to happen.
Once this shows up and it just pulls it, right?
So it's like, is it there now?
Is it there now?
And once it's there, it's gonna be like, okay, cool.
Here you go.
And here's your H3.
And then if it never finds it, it's gonna error out
because it says like, well, you wanted this
and it never showed up, right?
Now we can say expect H3.intertext
to contain submitted.
To contain is nice here rather than to be.
Like if you remember,
I think it actually is submitted with an exclamation point.
I just care that it shows them that it was submitted, right?
So that's what I'm gonna do contain instead of to be.
Some people might argue, you're good.
You did it.
You can stop here.
I wanna go further and I wanna like say like,
did they call the API with the right thing?
I think that's user facing because it's like,
if it doesn't call the API with the right thing,
the user's data is getting lost, right?
There are people that would argue that testing the API
endpoint and the data is implementation details
and shouldn't be tested.
And I think, I mean, they're wrong and that's okay, right?
Not everyone gets to be right all the time.
Except me, because I'm teaching.
So we're gonna test that.
Requests equals fetchMocker.requests.
And this is gonna give you back everything that it got.
So the first thing I'm gonna say like,
if you got more than one call, what happened?
Expect request.length to be one.
And then I'm gonna make sure that it called the right thing.
Requests zero.
It's the first thing, right?
Dot URL to be, make sure that it called the right one,
slash API slash contact.
Expect fetchMocker.requests.
And then you say to have been called with.
Slash API slash contact.
And then you give it what you expected
to have been called with.
So it's gonna be body JSON.stringify.
This one I'm gonna say, this is getting dangerously close
to implementation details, but headers,
content type, application slash JSON,
and method post.
Nope, don't do that.
Post.
So this is basically saying like,
I expect when they called fetch, they called it with this.
The correct URL and the right test data,
headers to be correct, method post, all that kind of stuff.
So again, let's go ahead and say npm tests,
and see what happens.
Failed the tests, let's go see what happened.
So use mutation, no query client set.
Did I, I thought I did.
Oh, it's client, not query client.
So bear with me a second, come back up here.
I said query client equals query client right there.
This is actually just supposed to be client.
This is something that if we had TypeScript,
we would have yelled at us right away.
So that is one of the nice things about TypeScript.
Yeah, TypeScript will like immediately say like,
when you don't pass in the right props that it expects,
that's one of the nicest things
about writing React with TypeScript.
Okay, name input screen, get all.
I don't want get all, I want get by placeholder text.
Get by placeholder text.
I'm surprised that actually works.
Because otherwise it will get all of them
and it gives you an array of them.
But I guess you can set dot value in an array, right?
It's not gonna yell about that, it's just weird.
But let's see, did that fix it?
It did fix it, okay.